A housing protest turned violent in Mfuleni, Cape Town, on Thursday. Residents blocked Mew Way and Faure roads, demanding to be housed in new flats built by the Western Cape government. Public Order Police arrived at the scene and, without first issuing a warning, used rubber bullets and teargas to disperse the crowd. In retaliation protesters burnt a truck. SAPS spokesperson Sergeant Noloyiso Rwexana said that a case of public violence and malicious damage to property was opened for investigation. She said no injuries were reported and no one was arrested. Danisile Tika was shot in the head by a rubber bullet. He said he was fixing a car when he heard gunshots. “I lifted my head and I was hit by a bullet. I was not part of the people who blocked the road, but I was shot because the police went into the township shooting,” he said.  Danisile Tika was shot in the head by a rubber bullet. Photo: Velani Ludidi A nine-year-old boy was hurt while, according to his father David Thukulula, being chased by police. “When people are running into the houses why do police chase them?” Thukulula asked. Community leader Mzoli Matutu explained the reason for the protest. He said 930 families from Ward 16 were expected to move into the new Forest Village Housing Development in Eersteriver. (Ward 16 includes an area known as Bossasa in Mfuleni, where the protesters were from.) “We signed agreements in 2017 but till today we are not placed. Instead we see other communities benefiting in a project that is in our ward,” he said. The R1.1 billion project started in January 2016 and is expected to be completed by December 2020. It will yield 4,820 housing opportunities. On 28 May some Ward 16 residents attempted to occupy flats in the development, but were stopped from doing so. The occupation was condemned by Western Cape Human Settlements Minister Tertuis Simmers. “I commend the manner in which the Department’s officials dealt with the incident and ensured the site was secured. We have also opened a case with the police so that those guilty of breaking the law can be brought to book. I would like to urge residents not to act in a lawless manner,” he said. Simmers said he will be visiting the development to see the current status of projects on the ground and to meet with communities. The protest action continued into the night.