A protest in Khayelitsha on Thursday morning has exposed fractures among residents of Mandela Park. Police arrested two protesters from the Mandela Park Backyarders in the early hours of Thursday morning, when the group tried to block roads in the township. At about 9am protesters regrouped and temporarily barricaded Govan Mbeki Road with bricks, burning tyres and twigs. The protesters claim that they have been excluded from a housing project in the area. But the protest has also exposed a rift with a rival group that distanced itself from Thursday’s attempted shutdown. Both factions appear to be calling themselves Mandela Park Backyarders. In an interview with GroundUp, Thandolwethu Aba, chairperson of Mandela Park Backyarders, disregarded a statement by the other group, questioning its authenticity. Aba accused the faction of fraudulently selling houses and plots in Mandela park. “That other group are the ones claiming to be the rightful owners of these [housing] plots,” he said. “They are benefiting and selling these plots fraudulently.” GroundUp was unable to confirm these claims. But a statement authored by Khaya Xintolo and Lungiswa Ntshuntshe on a Mandela Park Backyarders’ letterhead appeared to accuse Aba’s faction of “taking plots from deserving beneficiaries in Mandela Park,” it read. The statement read that their faction are the rightful beneficiaries of the housing project that was meant to start last year. “They (occupiers) want to be prioritised, disregarding proper processes and channels,” it read. In an email to GroundUp, Muneera Allie of the Western Cape Department of Human settlements, said that the Mandela Park Housing Project commenced in 2014 and consisted of 2 phases. In Phase 1 - the Department delivered a total of 281 housing opportunities which benefited approved beneficiaries from Mandela Park and Gugulethu. This phase is complete. Allie said that Phase 2 - is set to benefit Mandela Park backyarders. The Department was set to provide 58 housing opportunities, however this was increased to 89 opportunities since the Department managed to secure additional plots in the area. “Whilst Phase 2 was underway, various groups illegally invaded some of the plots. This also resulted in various groups disputing the beneficiary list of the project. The Department has held meetings to mediate between the interested groups that want to benefit from this project,” said Allie. She said these incidents had delayed the completion of the project.